Manipuraka is in a way a consequence of swadhishthana and muladhara.
This is a maintenance center. What is fundamental to the body, what is regenerative,
these two things together generate life.
Manipura just maintains.
This is important because whatever you create, if you don't maintain, it'll be gone.
A garden, however beautiful it may look, if it's not maintained
for a month, it will no more be a garden, it'll be gone.
So maintaining this is very, very important. In that sense, manipura is important.
People can move their manipura, in the sense… All of them can be moved
but particularly with manipura, there is more mobility
because this is the only place, where all the 72,000 nadis
meet and redistribute themselves.
Because of that, one can move their manipura in many different ways.
Those of you who are on martial arts,
one important aspect is to be able to move the manipura.
If you have to move the manipura, your martial art has to come to a place,
where it goes from movement to stillness.
To bring this stillness into the system is all the movement. All the movement,
violent and difficult movements of martial art is to come to a place,
where you can be without any movement.
When stillness comes, then your ability to move
the manipura becomes enormously enhanced. In some of the movies
and other things, you must have seen these Far Eastern movies, they're showing you,
one old man is sitting there, hooh if he do, everybody
just falls down just like that
no, I'm not talking about the Rajnikanth movies
there, more things happen, that's a different matter
because your ability to move the manipura gives you a different kind of power. And
one thing that is done with
Far Eastern martial art styles is
continuously knocking the manipura in so many ways.
Every day, hundreds of punches are taken in the stomach
to strengthen this in such a way that
it is very stable, but because it's so stable, you can move it where you want.
If you move your maintenance center away from the navel,
then you have a certain capacity that the body's ability to last,
body's ability to take injury, body's ability to take beating
is greatly, greatly enhanced because
you have moved the manipura away from the navel center and
it gives a phenomenal capability to move your energy. But
once you use manipura, once you move manipura from its naturals
location, then it's very important you keep your body still, otherwise
you will not last long. Anybody who does that
will never live long, they won't cross thirty-five, thirty-six years of age.
Because once you move manipura, it is important that you
learn to keep your body very, very still.
If any movement happens at that time, then the entire maintenance center
will go into a disarray.
Once the maintenance center goes into disarray, you will die in strange ways.
Nobody can diagnose what's happening with you.
You will simply die of something strange happening, which has no reason,
no logical reason as to why it's happening in normal sense.
So one of the things that
people who're on the manipura sadhana will do
not the martial arts people, they are looking at physical prowess
on the spiritual path, one of the things that we do is to bring sound to manipura.
Because if you bring any sound to manipura , it spreads right across the body
and the body will reverberate with this sound.
Now let's say you want sound "Shiva", "Shambho" to become part of your system,
then you do manipura sadhana with the sound, so that it spreads
to every part of the body and now the very body reverberates like that.
This happened. Palani Swami was referred to as Palani Swami because
he never told anybody what's his name – maybe even he didn't remember.
Because people saw him in many fantastic states around the Palani hills,
people referred to him as Palani Swami. One of the things that happened in his life was…
Because he was... without doing anything, just by sitting in
one place, he was drawing such crowds,
the temple priests were little resentful. This man who does nothing,
who begs his food from other people, is drawing so many people.
They're sitting in the temple morning to evening, doing their rituals and duties.
But people are not coming that way, they're going this way.
So, they wanted to find something, some rankle out there.
So one day, Palani Swami was accused that he's taking god's name when
he's doing his morning ablutions, which is considered not right.
When you are at shit, you should not say "Shiva", that's the whole thing, to put it simply.
So he was brought before
the village panchayat and accused
that he's desecrating god by uttering
"Shambho" when he's out there to relieve himself in the morning.
They brought him in front of this ignorant bunch of judges.
He simply sat there, eyes closed, mouth closed.
A loud reverberation of sound "Shambho" went on.
That was the end of their prosecution. And he got too much
attention, so he left that place.
He didn't want that much attention, so he left that place because
after this too much attention started coming. People started
gathering in big numbers, so he moved away from there.
So this, if you move a sound to your manipura,
now this will spread right across the system
and the very body will reverberate this sound.
If you utter it with... in your mouth, it is called japa.
If you utter it with your heart, it's called tapa.
If you bring it to your manipura, it's called ajapa. That means,
without doing japa, the sound is enemating from you. Without
Without opening your mouth, without using your vocal cord,
without using the air passages for which are needed to utter a sound,
the very body reverberates the sound.
These three chakras, manipura, muladhara, swadhishthana and manipuraka
constitute in many ways the physical dimension of the body.
The other four of are of a different nature. These three are most essential.
Whether one wants to live physically well,
mentally well, emotionally well, or energetically well
or to enhance one's capabilities of living on this planet,
these three are most important and entire schools of yoga
appeared in permutations and combinations of these three. The others
have a different significance and consequence.